Hello there.
This is De La Rue.
And welcome back.
Now, let's look at data types that represent floating point numbers.
Floating point numbers are real numbers like 3.14, and they can be negative two.
And they are good for measurements such as product rating or distances between two points or temperature
and so on and so forth.
And in Java they can be represented by either float or double data types.
And here is the table with more information about it.
And double table is similar to the one that we saw for integers.
One new column has been added to indicate precision, which indicates the number of digits we can have
after the decimal point.
Like integer data types float and double.
Also get a default of zero.
Note that variables declared within the methods do not get such a default value and here the trailing
f indicates float while the trailing D indicates double.
So let's start with fraud.
Fraud is represented in 32 bits and can take any value between plus or -3.4 times ten to the power of
38.
Here the notation with an E is called as exponential or scientific notation, and E can be in either
upper or lower case.
Generally, such a scientific notation is used only when representing very large or very small numbers.
And with regards to precision with flawed, we can have at most 6 to 7 decimal digits.
Next double is represented in 64 beds and hence can store larger range of values.
And the range of values it can store is in between plus or -1.7 times ten to the power of 308.
And with regards to precision, with double, we can have at most 15 to 16 decimal digits.
So as we can see, double is more precise when compared to float.
So just try to memorize this, the information in this table as much as possible, just like in the
case of integers.
Here we can see that we have the value 1.74 double and 3.4 for float.
So it's just twice.
So that's a way to remember.
And for the exponent part, you have 38 for float and 308 for double.
So that's just a tip to remember.
So we can see precision here, 6 to 7 digits for float and 15 to 16 digits for double.
So if a number has more decimal digits than what a float or double can represent, then it cannot be
accurately represented and hence would be approximated.
That is, the number of decimal digits would be reduced to 6 to 7 or 15 to 16 depending on the data
type.
Number PI is one such example.
With real numbers, even within a small range of numbers like, say, point one and point two, we can
have infinite real numbers.
So many of these numbers cannot be accurately represented by either float or double because they have
limited number of bits.
And of the two it is recommended to use double as it is more precise.
And in general, you should stick with eight and double.
So among the integer data types and is what you should be using, but if the value falls outside the
range of it, then you can use long.
And if memory saving is critical, then you can think about using smaller sized data types like byte
short and float, and you can also use them if you think it helps with readability.
And it seems game development is one area where float is preferred.
Now internally java users ie seven 5414 point scheme to represent float and double recall that it was
signed to complement scheme for integers.
In the earlier lecture on integer data types.
I mentioned about a link provided in the resources section which discusses about these internal data
representation schemes like Tripoli 754 format.
So if needed, at some point you can check it out.
It's a really good article.
Now let's switch over to Ed and look at how float and double variables are declared.
Here we are in the student class.
So let's go ahead and extend this class and add a new floating point variable.
But before doing that, let's do some cleanup here.
Let's remove all of this.
Let's remove this main value.
Max value variables.
And let's also remove this rank here.
I think we don't need that.
So this is good enough.
So let's leave this as byte.
We don't have to change it to end.
We said that we should be preferring int and double data types, but let's leave it like that and let's
also remove this the print statements.
So this is the student class.
Just in case you have missed the previous lectures, let me just give a quick recap of this.
So we have the student class and we declared a few variables like the ID here.
So the student ID is thousand and the age is 18.
And then the phone number is this one.
And we have one method here called compute where we are printing all of these values.
And here we have one variable called next ID, which is nothing but ID plus one.
So it would be 1001.
And in the main method we are creating an object of student and we are just invoking this method compute.
So that's all we are doing.
So let's add our new variable, lets the data type be float and the variable is GPA.
GPA stands for grade point average and it is used to judge the performance of a student in a particular
semester based on the grades he or she receives for the different courses, for the different courses
that the student is enrolled in.
So it's called a grade point average.
So it's just an average of the grades.
So GPA is something that many universities and colleges across the world use to judge students performance
in every semester.
They have a certain GPA, but for the entire program itself, let's say it's a bachelor's or a master's
program, they would also have GPA, which would be an average of the grades of all of the courses.
So many universities across the world follow GPA and GPA typically is for 4.0.
So that's the maximum.
And let's say the student has a GPA of 3.8, which is a very good GPA.
So that's it.
And for flawed, we have a trailing F, so that's mandatory.
So that's a must and it can be either in lowercase or uppercase.
And let's also print this value here.
And so this is in the basics folder.
So we need to be in the basics folder.
So we have the directory structure here and let's just compile student.
So I prints GPA here.
So this is a float literal.
So let's see what happens if we remove the trailing f.
So it gives a compilation error and this error message should be familiar to you.
It says incompatible types, possible lossy conversion from double to float.
So what it means is we are trying to assign a double literal.
So if you do not include the trailing f here, then it would be a double data type.
So by default, if you do not include anything, it's going to be a double literal and we are trying
to assign a double to a float and that's not possible and double is a larger data type.
So that's the thing.
So we need to change this to double.
So let's change it to double.
Now let's compile it.
And compiles fine.
And it prints a value 3.8.
So by default, it would be a double letter.
Now, if you wish, you can also put a DD here and it can be either in lowercase or uppercase.
And that would indicate that it's a double data type.
So if you do not include anything, it's still going to be double literal.
And run it.
So that's that.
And you clear up the screen.
Now, we also mentioned about the scientific notation or exponential notation.
So that would be E and let's say we have four.
So it would be 3.8 times ten to the power of four.
So that would be how much?
38,000.
There you go.
So such a scientific notation is used when you want to represent very large or very small numbers.
Now, next thing is let's look at the precision.
We said with double, it would be 15 to 16 digits.
So we have more than that.
Okay.
Now, here, let me market.
So it's four here.
Eight.
12 and 15.
So this huge number has been truncated to 15 digits because double has a precision of 15.
So that's a truncation.
So there is an approximation and besides that, there is something called rounding that has been done.
So the last digit is actually nine, so it has been rounded to nine.
So that's what they say.
So that's called a rounding.
So the number is just approximate.
So we can see that the preciseness is around 15 to 16 digits.
Now let's change this to float and let's put the mandatory F here.
Recompile and rerun it.
Now it is printing three, four, five, six, seven can have a max of seven digits.
So that's why the rest of the digits have been truncated.
So that's very flawed.
So that's all there is with float and double data types.
So let me just change it back to double, because double is what we need to be using.
So that's the suggested data type.
And among INT it is the INT data type that we need to be using most of the time.
That's it.
Thank you.
Happy coding and see you in the next lecture.